<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>

<head>
      <meta charset=utf-8">
      <title>Continuity of Operations under Travel Restrictions</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="/StyleSheets/generic-base-1.css" type="text/css">
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../assets/main.css">
      <link rel="shortcut icon" href="/Icons/WWW/Literature.gif">
      <style type="text/css">
	.issue {
	outline: solid red;
	margin-left: 2em;
	margin-right: 4em;
	}
	.issue::before {
	font-weight: bold;
	content: "Issue:";
	}

	.subtopic {
	font-weight: bold;
	}
	.subtopic::after {
	content: " - ";
	}
      </style>
</head>

<body>
      <div id="header">
            <span class="logo"><a href="/"><img src="/Icons/WWW/w3c_home_nb" alt="W3C" height="48"
                              width="72" /></a></span>
            <div class="breadcrumb">
                  <a href="/Member/">Member</a> &rarr;&nbsp;<a href="/Guide/">The Art of Consensus</a> &rarr;&nbsp;
                  <h1>Continuity of Operations under Travel Restrictions</h1>
            </div>
            <p class="baseline">This <strong>Guidebook</strong> is the collected wisdom of the W3C Group Chairs and
                  other collaborators.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="toc">
            <h4>Also On This Page&nbsp;&rarr;&nbsp;</h4>
            <ul>
                  <li style="display: none"><a href="#purpose">Purpose</a>&nbsp;&bull;&nbsp;</li>
                  <li><a href="#ac_meeting">W3C AC Meeting</a>&nbsp;&bull;&nbsp;</li>
            </ul>
      </div>
      <h2 id='status'>Status</h2>
      <p>This is a work-in-progress, started in February 2020.  Comments may be made in the <a href="https://github.com/w3c/Guide/issues">GitHub repo</a>.</p>
      <h2 id='purpose'>Purpose</h2>

      <p>
            With travel restrictions, the world
            relies even more on online communication/interaction and the World Wide Web is a crucial part of the human society.
      </p>
      <p>
            This document outlines plans to continue W3C activities while
            travel restrictions and isolation protocols limit the ability of W3C
            community members to participate in-person in W3C meetings,
            <a href='https://www.w3.org/blog/news/archives/8376'>including
            the W3C Staff</a>.
      </p>

      <h2 id="people">Addressing the needs of your participants first</h2>

      <p>
            First and foremost, Group chairs should make room for people to acknowledge new challenges. Everyone is coping with the crisis differently
            and with different work, living or family conditions. It's important in those times to allow individuals the time and space
            needed to ensure that their care and safety come first.
      </p>

      <p>The W3C <a href="https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/">Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct</a> applies to
            all W3C meetings, no matter their format.</p>

      <h2 id='policy'>General policy for meetings</h2>

      <p>
            Meeting face-to-face is an important component of the work for some of our Groups. Meetings enable Group chairs to:
      </p>
      <ol>
            <li>set an alternative dynamic compared to interactions by email/Github or during teleconferences</li>
            <li>Focus synchronously on a set of issues and goals and reduce distractions;</li>
            <li>Bring to closure hard issues that have been languishing for months due to lack of consensus.</li>
      </ol>
      </p>

      <dl>
            <dd>We expect Chairs to replace in-person meetings with virtual
            presence meetings rather than simply canceling their in-person meetings, to the extent that these are respectful of the individual
            needs.</dd>
      </dl>

      <h2 id='types'>Meeting Purposes</h2>

      <p>
            We encounter several types of in-person meetings at W3C:
      </p>
      <ol>
            <li>Group face-to-face meetings;</li>
            <li>Workshops;</li>
            <li>Plenary meetings;</li>
            <li>Steering Committee meetings;</li>
            <li>Advisory Committee meetings.</li>
      </ol>

      <p>Virtual presence meetings can take several forms, some better suited
	to the meeting purpose than others. Refer to
        the section <a href="#sessions">Meeting Formats</a>
        below for examples.</p>

      <p class='note'>
	Note:
	<ul>
	  <li><a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Member/w3c-ac-members/2020JanMar/0025.html">W3C May 2020 Advisory Committee Meeting</a> (member link) will be a distributed meeting</li>
	  <li><a href='https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Member/w3c-ac-members/2019JulSep/0036.html'>W3C 2020 TPAC</a> (member link) is, as of 13 March 2020, happening as planned,
            on 26-30 October 2020, in Vancouver BC, Canada. We are however working a virtual backup.</li>
	</ul>
      </p>

      <h2 id='virtualPresence'>Arrangements for Virtual Presence</h2>

      <p>
        Virtual presence meetings occur when all or some of the
        participants are attending remotely.  All participants should
        realize that when people pivot to new environments new issues
        can arise,
        including <a href='#accessibility'>accessibility</a> and
        separation from one's usual work place. Meeting chairs should
        leave space for the participants to talk about this.
      </p>

      <p id='videoconferencing'><span class='subtopic'>Video Conferencing</span>
	    Groups should plan to make extensive use of video conferencing services
            for those unable to travel. In the case of travel restrictions
	    for some but not all participants, some participants may wish to gather
	    in hubs (if allowed by local authorities).  When such gatherings occur, a local facilitator at each hub
	    should assure equitable participation by all through good communication
	    and participation practices; e.g. no "side conversations" even if muted.
	    Every effort must be made to put all the meeting participants on equal
          terms whether they are at a hub or participating outside of a hub.
      </p>
      <p id='scheduling'><span class='subtopic'>Scheduling</span>
	    Groups should give consideration to scheduling their meeting(s) in a
            timezone that works for the majority of the attendees.&nbsp; As
            participants will be working in their local timezones, what is "workable"
            will vary with individual circumstances, including sensitivity to
            work-from-home environments and non-participant colleagues who may not be
            aware that the participant is "away" even if they are physically in their
            office.</p>

      <p>Meeting duration should be limited to 4 hours per day; consider two
            90-minute segments with an hour break between them.&nbsp; That break can
            be used by the participants for "hallway" conversations, arranged on
            separate conference channels.</p>

      <p id='materials'><span class='subtopic'>Materials</span>
	    Presenters are even more strongly encouraged to distribute
	    (post to the Web) presentation materials in advance of the
	    meeting to allow participants to avoid using extra
	    download bandwidth during the meeting.  Presentation
	    materials must be available in accessible formats that
	    meet <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/?currentsidebar=%23col_customize&levels=aaa">WCAG 2.1 AA</a>.
	    If it is not possible to provide a structured document
	    within a videoconference presentation window, provide an
	    accessible source file on the Web.</p>
      <p id='video'><span class='subtopic'>Video</span>
	    Video cameras are <strong>strongly</strong> encouraged; this improves the sense of being
            together.&nbsp; Groups may prefer to use teleconferencing services that
            allow each participant to choose not to receive video streams if their
            network becomes saturated.
	    However, any discussion content that is shared via video, including
	    screen sharing, must be made <a href='https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/'>accessible</a> by some means to those who cannot
	    -- or choose not to -- use the video feed.</p>
      <p id='screen-sharing'><span class='subtopic'>Screen sharing</span>
            While screen sharing can be an effective way to work together, it also
            causes accessibility problems since it prohibits the use of screen readers and translation services.
            A best practice is to post accessible materials on the Web and share links instead of just showing a picture of it.</p>
      <p id='accessibility'><span class='subtopic'>Accessibility</span>
	    In all cases W3C wants to make sure that people with
	    accessibility needs can participate. Meeting organizers
	    must consider how best to accomplish that with what is
	    currently available; e.g. is captioning or interpretation
	    needed? Are meeting organizers aware of any potential
	    interoperability issues between the videoconferencing
	    platform and individuals' assistive technologies? Ensure
	    that virtual presence meetings are accessible for all
	    participants using resources including <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/media/av/">Making
	    Audio and Video Media Accessible</a>
	    and <a href='https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/'>How
	    to Meet WCAG 2, A Quick Reference</a>.</p>
      <p id='testing'><span class='subtopic'>Testing</span>
	    Participants should be offered testing opportunities to
	    assure their local equipment is operational and their
	    bandwidth adequate.  Participants should test their
	    appearance if they plan to use a camera as well as the
	    quality of their audio.  During testing solicit frank
	    feedback from others on the quality of each.
      </p>

      <h3 id='selectingvideoconferencing'>Selecting a video conferencing service</h3>

      <p>The considerations for a video conferencing service include:</p>
      <ul>
            <li>ability for a participant to turn off incoming video (see network bandwidth)</li>
            <li>accessibility</li>
            <li>audio quality and settings</li>
            <li>cost</li>
            <li>dial-in capability</li>
            <li>internationalization</li>
            <li>interoperable browser support</li>
            <li>network bandwidth</li>
            <li>Native platform independence (a native app that works on Linux, Mac, Windows, …)</li>
            <li>privacy</li>
            <li>queue management</li>
            <li>reliability</li>
            <li>scalability</li>
            <li>screen and application sharing (share only one app, not only entire screen)</li>
            <li>security</li>
            <li>video quality and settings</li>
      </ul>
      <p>
            W3C benefits from MIT institutional licenses for WebEx and Zoom services and Groups may use those with assistance from the W3C Team. We do attempt to mitigate the above
            concerns on those services by setting options and provide usage guidelines.
      </p>

      <h2 id='workshops'>W3C Workshops</h2>

      <p>
            We intend to plan fully distributed <a href="https://www.w3.org/Consortium/Process/#GAEvents">workshops</a> with virtual presence sessions.
		We will both adapt the existing model (program committee issues call for participation
		and invites presentations based on submitted position statements) and experiment with new models.
		In any format, materials should be posted and archived accessibly. Participants should be notified of plans for audio/video recording and confidentiality level.
      </p>
      <p>
	Workshops are often key gathering spots for consideration of new ideas,
        with a mix of prepared presentation, pre-determined or self-organizing breakout sessions,
        and the all-important "hallway track" opportunity for side conversations.
	Organizers are encouraged to replicate this mix in virtual meetings. Some proposals include:
	<ul>
            <li>Plenary-style presentations: one or a few people present to the group and take questions.
	      <li>Distributed breakouts: break into parallel channels with distinct videoconference lines (or zoom's "breakout" feature) and report back.
            <li>Lightning talks: invite attendees to give short (3-min) video presentations introducing themselves. These may be topical or highlight a side interest.
            <li>Open mic breaks: leave the videoconference bridge open during breaks, and encourage attendees to chat and start side channels to continue discussions of shared interest.
            <li>… additional suggestions welcome to the Strategy team.
      </ul>

      <h2 id='ac_meeting'>W3C AC Meeting</h2>

      <p>The Advisory Committee meeting has provided for remote participation for
            many years.&nbsp; We have <a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Member/w3c-ac-members/2020JanMar/0025.html">announced</a> (member link) that the May 2020 meeting will be fully distributed; we should
            (will) assign someone the role of administrative "host" of the meeting;
            identifying all participants in both irc and the teleconferencing service
            and assuring that all audio channels other than the chair and presenter
            are muted when not in active conversation.

      <p>Presenters will be expected to pre-record their presentations and meeting
	attendees will be expected to prepare for the meeting by viewing those
	recordings.  W3C staff will provide assistance in making the recordings
	and will arrange to have captions added.  Staff will also investigate the
	feasibility of having the captions translated to other languages.</p>

      <p>Each presentation will be accompanied by a WBS form for submitting
	questions and comments in advance.</p>

      <p>As is our standard practice, the presentation slides should also be posted
	in the Web to allow the meeting participants to quickly cite and call up
	a specific slide.  These slides should be posted in the Web at the same time
	the recording is posted.  The captioning should add "[next slide]" text
	to allow use of assistive technology with the posted slides in combination
	with the recorded captions.</p>

      <p>Given pre-recorded presentations, the bulk of the synchronous meeting time
	should be devoted to Q&amp;A.  The presenter may do a brief (~3 minute)
	recap of the material that was presented via recording but should present
	only a single slide on which the discussion points are all summarized.
	The presenter should use the WBS input to inform this recap and to address
      questions and comments that were submitted in advance.</p>

      <p>High quality real-time captioning of the meeting should be provided
      in more than one language.</p>

      <p>We will use irc as the default mode of hand-raising and
	discussion.  If you have difficulty accessing irc, for
	instance due to network firewalls or assistive technology
	reasons, please let us know the reason in advance in case we
	are able to address it or otherwise provide an alternative.
      </p>

      <p>
            Special guests are still welcome in the meeting, upon approval of the Chair
            of the Advisory Committee meeting. Recordings <em>may</em> be available for a limited time for
            special guests.
      </p>

      <h2 id='sessions'>Meeting Formats</h2>
      <p>
            Agenda items during virtual presence meetings could take
            several of the following forms. The following sections
            propose different suggestions of replacement in lieu of
            in-person meetings.
      </p>
      <p>
        For all forms of sessions the Chairs should also allow
        asynchronous feedback and discussions, using GitHub issues,
        emails, or other forms of input before and after a virtual
        presence meeting, or between days in the case of a multi-day
        meeting.
      </p>

	<h3 id='discussionSessions'>Primarily Discussion Sessions</h3>
	<p>Intended for agenda items requiring only discussions (such
           as specification issues or panels).  Those should be
           replaced by dedicated discussion with virtual presence,
           possibly clustered.
        </p>

	<h3 id='presentationSessions'>Presentation+Discussion Sessions</h3>

	<p>Intended for agenda items requiring a presentation first,
           followed by a discussion (such as technical proposals or
           position papers).  Those <em>should</em> be replaced by
           pre-recording the presentation(s) with slides at least 24
           hours before the discussion (to avoid burden on
           non-timezone friendly participants).  Then, the
           participants can have one or more dedicated discussion with
           virtual presence.
	</p>

        <h3 id='updateSessions'>Update Sessions</h3>
        <p>Intended for agenda items to update the participants on
           specific items (such as implementation reports or editor
           updates).  Those <strong>should</strong> be replaced by
           pre-recording the presentation(s) with slides, with
           possibly <em>one</em> teleconference to allow for
           questions, clustering the updates
           together. You <em>MAY</em> however differ those sessions
           depending on the important of the topic.
	</p>
      </dl>

      <hr>
      <address><a href="mailto:plh@w3.org">plh</a>, <a href="mailto:swick@w3.org">Ralph</a></address>
</body>

</html>
