<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>

<head>
      <meta charset=utf-8">
      <title>On TPAC Group and Joint-Group Meetings</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="/StyleSheets/generic-base-1.css" type="text/css">
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../assets/main.css">
      <link rel="shortcut icon" href="/Icons/WWW/Literature.gif">
      <style type="text/css">
	.issue {
	outline: solid red;
	margin-left: 2em;
	margin-right: 4em;
	}
	.issue::before {
	font-weight: bold;
	content: "Issue:";
	}

	.subtopic {
	font-weight: bold;
	}
	.subtopic::after {
	content: " - ";
	}
      </style>
</head>

<body>
      <div id="header">
            <span class="logo"><a href="/"><img src="/Icons/WWW/w3c_home_nb" alt="W3C" height="48"
                              width="72" /></a></span>
            <div class="breadcrumb">
                  <a href="/Member/">Member</a> &rarr;&nbsp;<a href="/Guide/">The Art of Consensus</a> &rarr;&nbsp;
                  <h1>On TPAC Group and Joint-Group Meetings</h1>
            </div>
            <p class="baseline">This <strong>Guidebook</strong> is the collected wisdom of the W3C Group Chairs and
                  other collaborators.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="toc">
            <h4>On This Page&nbsp;&rarr;&nbsp;</h4>
            <ul>
                  <li><a href="#group">Group meeting</a>&nbsp;&bull;&nbsp;</li>
                  <li><a href="#joint">Joint meeting</a>&nbsp;&bull;&nbsp;</li>
            </ul>
      </div>

      <p>
        The goal of Group meetings during a W3C TPAC is to gather the community together, to
        create momentum and collective brainstorming around challenges faced by the Web. The
        technical plenary is a set of collaborative meetings, bringing together W3C technical
        groups, the Advisory Board, the TAG and the Advisory Committee for exciting, coordinated
        work. The benefit of assembling the community for thought-provoking discussions is invaluable.
      </p>
      <p>
        While W3C Groups meet throughout the year in a variety of ways (teleconference, Zoom, F2F), the annual TPAC plays a unique and special role in the annual
        calendar of a Group.  What sets these meetings apart is that by having the Group together
        for 2 days (and also adjacent to many other groups), the Group can get done that which it
        cannot normally do - specifically (see below).
      </p>

      <h2 id=tpac2021>TPAC 2021</h2>

      <p>
        With the pandemic, many Groups did not meet for TPAC 2020, and other groups met briefly
        and did not fully achieve the full goals of a TPAC meeting. That has caused a deficit
        in meeting the special objectives that we previously have only been able to achieve through
        TPAC Group meetings.
      </p>
      <p>
        In TPAC 2021, since we are still virtual, it will still be challenging to achieve all of
        the benefits of a physical meeting. But two years into virtual meetings, it is recommended
        that Groups try to get together to achieve  some of these benefits. At a minimum they
        should consider doing an overview of the state of the Working Group and its deliverables,
        looking at big challenges ahead, where the priorities should be, and use a different agenda
        from your regular recurring meetings.
      </p>
      <p>Since we'll be virtual, a few reminders:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Make sure it's easy for outsiders to discover your meeting. Add your meeting to:
              <ol>
              <li>the <a href='https://www.w3.org/wiki/TPAC/2021/GroupMeetings'>TPAC 2021 page</a>.</li>
              <li>the <a href='https://www.w3.org/blog/2021/03/group-calendaring-service-enters-beta-test/'>W3C Calendar of the Group</a>.</li>
            </ol>
        </li>
        <li>A distributed meeting is one where most of the attendees are expected to participate from remote locations (see <a href='organize.html'>dealing with timezones</a>).</li>
        <li>See our <a href='zoom.html'>considerations regarding zoom</a>, including recordings and automated meeting transcripts.</li>
        <li>If you plan to make a presentation, we recommend you to record them in advance.
           Ask the events team for assistance if needed but they require 2 weeks lead time (deadline is October 11). See also
           our <a href="https://www.w3.org/wiki/Virtual_Presentations">recording tips</a>.</li>
        <li>Consider if a breakout session might be useful.</li>
      </ol>

      <h2 id='group'>TPAC Group meeting</h2>

      <p>TPAC meeting is an opportunity for a Working or Interest Group :</p>
      <ol>
      <li>look on the progress and goals of the Group as well as the deliverables;</li>
      <li>look at related work (e.g in Community Groups) and what's new out there within the scope or related to the Group's mission;</li>
      <li>welcome new participants, understand their interests, get their questions/feedback on the Group, and potentially mentor them on how to contribute;</li>
      <li>welcome observers, understand their interests in the Group, and get them interested in joining the Group and helping;</li>
      </ol>

      <p>On the deliverables:</p>

      <ul>
        <li>State of the Working Group and its deliverables (past, present and future)
        <ul>
          <li>high level view of the Working Group (success/challenges, goals, how close is the group to meet
                its charter goals?, etc.)
        <li>Reports on deliverables. Make sure to go through each, even if nothing changed and it gets brief, since some might
        in needs in any case.
           <ul>
           <li>state of issues/pull requests
           <li>state of tests
           <li>state of implementation
           <li>last 12 months progress
           <li>expectations/hopes for next 12 months (eg important milestones coming up)
           <li>what contributions would be welcome from other/new participants
           </ul>
      </ul></li>
      <li>Blocking issues that are difficult to progress in weekly calls. Some indicators of such issue:
      <ul>
      <li>Does the issue need more than 25% of the Group to be present to be moved forward? if you only need to talk to 2 or 3 individuals, take those on the side unless asked otherwise
      <li>Does an issue require participants from outsiders (participants from other groups, etc.)</li>
      <li>Does the issue need a whiteboard in the room to be discussed?
      <li>Do you need guidance or help, such as choosing between several designs/solutions?
      <li>Ask participants which issue they would like to dive in? (limit of [2? 3?] per participant?)
      </ul>
   </ul>
      <h2 id='joint'>TPAC Joint Meetings</h2>
      <ul>
      <li>TPAC is an opportunity for joint meetings between Groups:
      <ol>
      <li>issues (blocking or otherwise) that you'd be able to advance if you can schedule a joint meeting with another Group, or with representatives from that Group
      <li>horizontal issues raised during wide reviews that have been queued
      <li>requests sent to other Groups that did not progress in there
      </ol>
      </ul>
      <h2 id='breakout'>TPAC Breakouts</h2>

      <p>
         If your Group has topic(s) of general interest, consider organizing a breakout session to attract a wider audience.
      </p>
      <hr>
      <p>Feedback is to <a href="https://github.com/orgs/w3c/teams/guidebook">@w3c/guidebook</a>
       and is welcome on <a href="https://github.com/w3c/Guide/issues">GitHub</a></p>
</body>

</html>
